In the previous chapter, we saw some fundamental limitations of perfect secrecy. In this chapter, we begin our study of modern cryptography by introducing the weaker (but sufficient) notion of computational secrecy. We then show how this definition can be used to bypass the impossibility results shown previously for perfect secrecy and, in particular, how a short key (say, 128 bits long) can be used to encrypt any number of long messages (say, gigabytes in total).

Along the way we will study the fundamental notion of pseudorandomness, which captures the idea that something can “look” completely random even though it is not. This powerful concept underlies much of modern cryptography, and has applications and implications beyond the field as well.

3.1 Computational Security

In Chapter 2, we introduced the notion of perfect secrecy. While perfect secrecy is a worthwhile goal, it is also unnecessarily strong. Perfect secrecy requires that absolutely no information about an encrypted message is leaked, even to an eavesdropper with unlimited computational power. For all practical purposes, however, an encryption scheme would still be considered secure if it leaked information with some tiny probability to eavesdroppers with bounded computational power. For example, a scheme that leaks information with probability at most 2^-60 to eavesdroppers investing up to 200 years of computational effort on the fastest available supercomputer (or cluster of computers) would be more than adequate for real-world applications. Computational security definitions take into account computational limits on an attacker, and allow for a small probability that security is violated, in contrast to notions (such as perfect secrecy) that are information-theoretic in nature. Computational security is now the de facto way in which security is defined for almost all cryptographic applications.

We stress that although we give up on obtaining perfect secrecy, this does not mean we do away with the rigorous mathematical approach we have been taking so far. Definitions and proofs are still essential; the only difference is that we now consider a weaker (but still meaningful) notion of security.
 